---
title: 'ada lovelace, math and dpla'
date: 2015-07-21T18:52:50-07:00
draft: false
---

Yesterday, [Patrick Murray-John](https://twitter.com/patrick_mj) had a
great suggestion on Twitter: a DPLA event celebrating Ada Lovelace day:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Idea: a <a href="https://twitter.com/dpla?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">@dpla</a> building/hackathon thingy around Ada Lovelace day. Anyone done that? Ideas? <a href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/DPLAdaLovelace?src=hash&amp;ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">#DPLAdaLovelace</a></p>&mdash; Patrick Murray-John (@patrick_mj) <a href="https://twitter.com/patrick_mj/status/623294000791990272?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">July 21, 2015</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

In case you don't know much about Ada Lovelace, an English mathematician
in the early 19th century and the namesake of the awesome [Ada
Initiative](https://adainitiative.org/), or perhaps you don't know about
the Ada Lovelace Day, check out this site: <http://findingada.com/>.

I think a DPLA event for Ada Lovelace day is a fantastic idea, and I put
forward the thought that we have a DPLA Ada Lovelace Event that occurs
in different cities and communities on that same day, October 13. Each
event would introduce people to the Ada Lovelace as well as the DPLA
collections and API, then support making apps, syllabi, exhibitions, or
other creations focused on highlighting women in mathematics, science,
and technology - like Ada herself. These events could communicate
virtually to share ideas and excitement, either through Twitter (the
proposed hashtag currently is \#dplada, but that could change), via a
website for the day (<http://www.dpladalovelace.us>, set up by Patrick
MJ), and through community report-backs via the DPLA blog or other such
site.

A group of interested folks are now looking into making a possible DPLA
Ada Lovelace Event 'template', with guidelines and such for all DPLA
community representatives or perhaps just folks interested in seeing
this happen in their community. The <http://www.dpladalovelace.us> site
would also give more information about this template, the Ada Lovelace
Day, the DPLA, and contacts for the various events folks are trying to
pull together across the map. Anyone and everyone is welcome to
contribute to the existing DPLA Ada Lovelace Event template
[here](http://bit.ly/dplada_template). If you are interested in trying
to organize such an event, that is the place to mention it currently
(until we get a bit further with the planning stages).

### On a related and personal note...

*This part of the post just goes into my own views on the importance
bringing people like Ada Lovelace to the forefront. Feel free to skip,
as most of the DPLA Ada Lovelace Day info so far is up top.*

One of the reasons I find this event so important, besides that the DPLA
and surrounding library tech communities just do amazing work, is my own
tension with my own Mathematics academic background. The surge in
interest and visibility of important historical figures like Ada
Lovelace brings into light the struggles women and minorities had and
continue to have in STEM fields (science, technology, engineering,
mathematics), as well as our battles with imposter syndrome and lack of
support/allies.

This half of a blogpost is not about that topic broadly, which is
well-covered by others who are better placed to discuss it, but my own
disappointment in myself that I didn't make more of my own Mathematics
background and trying to understand what happened. Upon starting college
the first time around, I really focused on the sciences. Engineering,
Physics, Meteorology, Computer Science - I considered, even started,
majors in them all. But beyond my own inability to settle on one topic,
the communities in these academic departments supporting women was
lacking at best - despite being at the small, liberal arts college I
ended up at. I don't have the horror stories I've heard from other women
studying in STEM fields, but I didn't feel like I should stay in these
fields either. Having to continually explain that an engineering study
group meeting was not a 'date' was wearing. When I had a new solution
for a computer science problem, the 'techie guys' on my dorm floor
showed so much astonishment that I created it, it became embarrassing.
When I got a 98 on a Physics exam, my professor was convinced I cheated,
then when disproven, thought perhaps his tests were then too easy
(despite the fact that I got grief for breaking the curve in that class
for everyone else). There are other such stories - we all have them, and
it just is a testement to how continued, 'soft rejections' can seem
benign when isolated, but together become a destructive force.

However, I ended up in the Mathematics department, which was was
welcoming. There was more than 1 token women professor, as well
(although the gender balance in terms of who was tenured versus adjunct
was what you'd expect, sadly, and the inclusion of minorities entirely
lacking). Most of the female students, though by no means all, in the
department were studying to be Math teachers in secondary schools - this
was a very popular track for people from the area, and served a great
purpose. But I never got into that. When it came time for graduation,
however, I had a lot of personal turmoil (hey, college, don't we all
have that) and moved to NYC. I considered pursuing Mathematics at the
graduate level, but it just didn't manifest, despite being accepted to a
few programs. I had massive amounts of what I know now to be imposter
syndrome, among other things to deal with. I instead ended up teaching
middle school Mathematics in Washington Heights (and turned out to be an
absolutely horrible middle school teacher, but hey you don't know until
you try). How I got this position remains a bit of a mystery to me
looking back, since I had done absolutely no education courses, nor any
sort of tutoring work. But a women in mathematics, I mean, of course
you're going to be a math teacher...? (This was the view of my family,
friends and random strangers on the street) Who knows what effect
hearing that so often had. There was a lot more involved in this outcome
for me than societal pressures, I freely admit, but I wonder how big
something that seemed/seems so trivial could be.

Regardless, I went through a lot of careers, jobs, etc. in NYC. I'm glad
I moved there, despite my hard introduction via Dominican culture, the
NYC Public Schools System and Mathematics education. But looking at
where I am now, and getting excited about events like this Ada Lovelace
Day, and the growing support for women and minorities in STEM, I can't
help but feel disappointment in myself for how little I did with what
was, at one time, a great love and amount of time invested in learning
Mathematics - in particular, abstract algebra and topology. Like what
happens when you stop speaking a language daily, it fades away.
Eventually, the assumption became, whether to do with my gender or
because I accidentally fell into a career in libraries or both or
neither, is that I've (only) got a humanities background. Generally
folks with that assumption mean well, and its unintentional/unknown on
their part, but for me, it hits a nerve every time (that I used to be
able to hide pretty well, but have just given up trying to hide as of
late). Add weird community ideas on cataloging/metadata work and gender
to this mix, and it gets even more complicated. Trying to turn this
minefield into a village is rough but needed worked.

Yet, the library tech community has generally been a stellar space for
me to work out these issues and responses, because of the growth and
support within it for projects like the [Ada
Initiative](https://adainitiative.org/) and now the DPLA Ada Lovelace
Day possible event(s). So I'm excited to see this happen, if only for my
own personal work. But I also realize these events cannot happen without
us getting involved, imposter syndrome (or something I have with
stepping in to help organize events, "I'm being too bossy" syndrome,
which I'd argue is a subclass of imposter syndrome) or no. So, hey, you,
get involved in helping make this happen. Because we all have stuff to
work through, and working together on events like this can help.

Again, this is where the organizing for the DPLA Ada Lovelace is
currently happening, and I hope to see you involved:
[here](http://bit.ly/dplada_template) All are welcomed to contribute and
collaborate.

And, to hell with societal pressures, I'm planning to get my next degree
in Computer Science, if only as a belated thank you to that Computer
Science professor I had in college who told me, 'you should consider a
compsci degree, I'd be happy to support you in this department'. I only
realized much later what she was trying to say.
